.\" groff -Tpdf -mdoc
.Dd March 5, 2026
.Dt NEWF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm newf
.Nd create new files from templates
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl fhov
.Op Fl c Ar config
.Op Fl d Ar directory
.Oo
.Op Fl T
|
.Fl t Ar filetype
.Oc
.Oo
.Op Fl X
|
.Op Fl x
|
.Cm +x
.Oc
.Ar target ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility creates new files based on templates.
It searches for templates in a set of directories, processes them using
.Xr m4 1
if they are text files, or copies them if they are binary.
If a template is executable, it is executed directly to create the target.
.Pp
State-changing options like
.Fl t
and
.Fl x
apply to all subsequent
.Ar target
arguments until changed again.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl c Ar config
Specify an additional
.Xr m4 1
configuration file to be sourced before the template.
This can be used multiple times.
.It Fl d Ar directory
Specify an additional directory to search for templates.
This can be used multiple times.
Templates found in these directories have priority over default ones.
.It Fl f
Overwrite existing files and create parent directories if they do not exist.
.It Fl h
Display a help message and exit.
.It Fl o
Output the generated content to standard output instead of creating files on disk.
If multiple targets are processed, their contents are separated by a NULL character.
.It Fl T
Reset filetype detection to automatic based on the target's extension or name.
This is the default.
.It Fl t Ar filetype
Manually set the filetype for subsequent targets.
If
.Ar filetype
starts with
.Sq ./ ,
the
.Sq .\&
is replaced with the auto-detected type from the filename.
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
Print information about created files and used templates to standard error.
.It Fl X
Clear the execute bit for subsequent targets.
This is the default.
.It Fl x
Toggle the execute bit for subsequent targets.
.It Cm +x
Set the execute bit for subsequent targets.
.El
.Sh TEMPLATES
Templates are searched in:
.Bl -enum
.It
Directories specified with
.Fl d .
.It
The directory returned by
.Ic xdg-user-dir TEMPLATES .
.It
.Pa ~/Templates
if the above is unavailable.
.El
.Pp
If
.Ic xdg-user-dir
is unavailable or returns
.Pa $HOME ,
.Nm
treats it as unavailable and falls back to
.Pa ~/Templates
if it exists.
.Pp
For a given filetype
.Ar type/subtype ,
.Nm
looks for a file named
.Ar type/subtype
or
.Ar type/subtype.*
(case-insensitive).
If a directory matches, it looks for a file named
.Ar default
therein.
If no match is found, it strips the last component (the subtype) and tries again with the remaining path.
.Sh M4 VARIABLES
When processing a text template with
.Xr m4 1 ,
the following variables are defined:
.Bl -tag -width "NAME"
.It Ev NAME
The name of the target file being created.
.It Ev ARG1 , ARG2 , ...
The subtypes extracted from the filetype path.
.It Ev ARC
The total count of subtypes.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Pa ~/.config/newf/config.m4
Default configuration file for
.Xr m4 1 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr m4 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An yuandi42 Aq realyuandi42@gmail.com
